
# Introduction

There are several different ways a Motus station can be installed all of
which depend on the location, purpose of the deployment, the
infrastructure and equipment available. This guide will provide an
overview of how different stations can be installed as well as some
in-depth instructions on how to set up a variety of fixed, or
free-standing towers with Yagi antennas and solar power. This booklet
will not include a set of exhaustive instructions, but is intended as a
guide that may need to be adapted to your project.

## Disclaimer and Health and Safety Tips

This guide is intended as a way to help individuals install their own
Motus station that should be adapted to the needs and abilities of each
individual. In addition, many installations include working at heights
above 2 meters (6 feet). Follow instructions provided by suppliers and
do not work without adequate knowledge or training. Individual projects
will have to abide by local health and safe regulations, or those of
their host organization.

Motus Pro Tip - WEAR GLOVES!

Foot wear-

High-vis and hard hats -

Working from Heights -

## Electrocution -What is a Motus Station?

A Motus station is an automated radio telemetry station designed to
listen to specific types of radio transmitters used to track wildlife.
These stations comprise the physical ground-based infrastructure of the
Motus Wildlife Tracking System. A station consists of several parts: a
radio receiver (computer) and peripherals such as antennas, cables, a
mounting structure, and a power supply. Installing and maintaining a
Motus station is no small task, but the rewards are great.

## Definitions

With all the terminology being thrown around with this technology, it
can be hard to keep track of what's what. [Go to Appendix A for a
terminology reference.](#_otprdi34k95o)
