# Station Installation

## Motus Pro Tip - Do not take short-cuts. Any short-cuts or sloppy workmanship drastically increases the chance that some kind of problem will occur and the station won't be operating when you need it to.

## Antenna and Coax Assembly

Several varieties of antennas exist of which only a few will be covered
here. All antennas should come with their own assembly instructions
which are more or less easy to follow so we will not go into great
detail here. Please see [[antenna anatomy]{.ul}](#antenna-anatomy) for
more details on parts.

*Note: The driven element and the attached connector are the most
sensitive parts of a Yagi antenna; pay special attention to prevent
damage to these parts and any connections. Damage to the driven element
may cause the antenna to no longer be tuned to the desired frequency
resulting in an ineffective antenna.*

### Recommended accessories

-   **Coax seal.** This is a type of soft rubber or silicone which is
    used to seal antenna connections. This is typically purchased
    separately from the antenna. Marine Goop (with UV protectant (link),
    and electrician, or plumbers puddy (with link).

-   **Coloured electrical tape or markers.** It can be difficult to keep
    track of which antenna corresponds with which cable once a station
    has been set up. Bring a few colours of electrical tape so you can
    colour code the antennas and coaxial cables.

-   **Zip ties, cable ties, zap straps.** These are indispensable for
    coaxial cable organisation. Used to support the coax cable along the
    antenna boom and mast.

-   **Hex nuts and bolts.** We use ¼" x 2" bolts for tripod assembly and
    ¼" x 1" bolts for affixing solar panels to the tripod**.** Use
    zinc-plates steel unless the station is deployed in a marine area
    where stainless steel should be used.

### Antenna mount

Antennas are usually attached to a metal pipe or mast using a type of
mounting bracket. Small antennas, like 434 MHz Yagis, all omni antennas,
and 3- to 5- element Yagis for the 150-166 MHz band can be butt-mounted
using a bracket which fits onto one end of the boom. Large antennas,
like 6- to 9- element Yagis for the 150-166 MHz band need to be mounted
along their mid-point to even out the lateral force on the mast. Larger
antenna can be butt-mounted, but usually require support wires attached
to the mid or end point of the antenna.

Nearly all antenna mounts use a metal plate with 4 u-bolts; 2 for the
antenna boom and 2 for the mast. For most antennas, the boom is mounted
perpendicular to the mast, but omni antennas will often be mounted
pointing straight up, meaning both the antenna and mast will be in the
same orientation.

### Coax connector

Most antennas will have a connector on the driven element for the coax
cable to be connected. The driven element and this connector are the
most sensitive parts of a Yagi antenna; pay special attention to these
parts so they are not impacted by anything. Damage to the driven element
may cause the antenna to no longer be tuned to the desired frequency.

Connecting

## Storage Container Assembly

What's the purpose of the storage container - primarily to store and
protect battery and charge controller.

Include recommendations to mount receivers on the mast or outside of a
box on the ground where possible, or if there is any remote risk of
flooding. It will also reduce potential damage from rodents and insects.

### Heavy-duty Container

#### Motus Pro Tip - DO NOT USE cheap plastic rubbermaid, or other plastic storage boxes that are not meant to be kept outside for extended periods of time.

#### Supplies

-   90L Rubbermaid Action Packer or equivalent heavy-duty, waterproof
    container.

    -   If using an alternative, ensure the container is actually
        waterproof and the lid is not concave such that water pools on
        top. Handles will need to be closed securely either with zip
        ties or a lock.

-   To prevent water ingress:

    -   2-inch pipe elbow (90 degrees) similar to: [[NIBCO 2 in. ABS DWV
        90-Degree H x H Vent
        Elbow-C5807VHD2]{.ul}](https://www.homedepot.com/p/NIBCO-2-in-ABS-DWV-90-Degree-H-x-H-Vent-Elbow-C5807VHD2/100344401)

    -   2-inch pipe bushing, similar to: [[2 in. x 1-1/2 in. ABS DWV
        Spig. x Hub Flush
        Bushing-C58012FHD2112]{.ul}](https://www.homedepot.com/p/2-in-x-1-1-2-in-ABS-DWV-Spig-x-Hub-Flush-Bushing-C58012FHD2112/100342353)

    -   Electrical tape or ABS cement

-   Zip ties

-   Wooden blocks or table for container to sit on (e.g.: 2-foot blocks
    cut from a 2x4).

-   Wood screws.

-   \[Optional\] To prevent insects and rodent ingress

    -   Plastic bags and/or steel wool.

    -   Aluminum window screening.

    -   JB Weld epoxy or equivalent.

    -   Container and stir stick for epoxy.

    -   Tool to cut into underside of container (e.g.: exacto knife).

#### Tools

-   Drill

-   [[2" hole
    saw]{.ul}](https://www.homedepot.com/p/Milwaukee-2-in-Hole-Dozer-Bi-Metal-Hole-Saw-with-3-8-in-Arbor-Pilot-Bit-49-56-9667/202327737)

-   Drill bits for screws

#### Instructions

1.  Drill 2" hole on one end of the Action Packer

2.  To prevent water ingress:

    a.  Place the 2-inch pipe bushing through the hole from the inside
        of the bin.

    b.  Apply a single layer of electrical tape or ABS cement to the
        exposed end of the bushing on the outside of the bin.

    c.  Attach the 2-inch pipe elbow to the bushing and force into place
        with the open end of the elbow pointing down.

3.  To prevent insect and rodent ingress

    a.  Cut a hole in the bottom of the container to allow water to
        drain.

    b.  Cut a piece of aluminum window screen about 1 inch (2.5 cm)
        larger than the hole.

    c.  Prepare the epoxy

    d.  Place the piece of aluminum window screen over the hole and
        apply a generous amount of the mixed epoxy around the entire
        edge, ensuring no gaps remain.

    e.  Once you have inserted all necessary cables into the bin,
        including your GPS and SensorGnome, you will need to pack the
        remaining space in the elbow with plastic bags (insects) and/or
        steel wool (rodents).

    f.

4.  Insert cable into the case

5.  To prevent insect and rodent ingress through the elbow, you will
    need to pack the remaining space in the elbow with plastic bags
    (insects) and/or steel wool (rodents).

## Power Assembly

### Solar Power

#### Supplies

-   [[Solar Panel]{.ul}](#solar-power)

-   [[Battery]{.ul}](#battery)

-   [[Charge Controller]{.ul}](#charge-controller)

-   [[14 AWG Spade
    connectors]{.ul}](https://www.homedepot.com/p/Gardner-Bender-16-14-AWG-4-6-Stud-Spade-Terminal-Vinyl-Blue-10-Pack-15-113/205846650)
    and [[stripper/crimping
    tool]{.ul}](https://www.homedepot.com/p/Klein-Tools-Klein-Kurve-Multi-Tool-Wire-Stripper-Crimper-1019SEN/305303655)

-   [https://www.kleintools.com/catalog/combination-cutting-tools/katapult-wire-stripper-and-cutter-solid-and-stranded-wire]{.ul}

#### Tools

-   Phillips screwdriver

-   Small flathead screwdriver

#### Instructions

1.

## Pop-Tower Assembly

A pop-tower is a type of standalone station that uses a tripod +
telescopic mast assembly to mount the antennas. The tripod can be used
to mount a solar panel if necessary.

### Prerequisites

#### Location

-   Must be flat and void of obstructions so antennas have a clear line
    of site.

-   Cannot be near any elevated power or telephone lines for safety
    reasons.

-   Tripod feet will sink into soft ground - use gravel or choose a
    hard/dry location to install. Also affix pieces of wood to each
    trippod foot to support the weight and movement and to provent
    sunking ('snow-shoe).

-   Ground must be soft enough to insert anchors (1 m/3 ft. or more,
    depending on hardness).

-   Choose a well-elevated site to avoid any risk of flooding during
    heavy rains or tidal surges.

-   Footprint of a pop-tower with guy wires has a radius equal to 70% of
    the tower's final height.

#### Hardware

-   Pop tower

    -   Tripod

    -   Wooden blocks (optional)

    -   Mast

        -   Height will depend on location, desired detections.

    -   Foot for mast (optional)

    -   Guy wires

    -   Quick links and/or carabiners (max 3/16")

    -   \[Optional\] Turnbuckles and stainless steel wire (snare wire)

    -   In-line wire tensioners.

    -   Anchors

        -   Can use \#6 rebar in 5-foot sections or [[ground
            anchors]{.ul}](https://www.homedepot.com/p/6-Piece-Ground-Anchor-Kit-IS-50016/202197240).

-   [[Antennas]{.ul}](#antennas-cables-and-dongles)

-   [[Coaxial Cable]{.ul}](#coax-cables)

-   [[Automated Receiver]{.ul}](#automated-telemetry-receivers)

#### Tools

-   Impact driver and/or ratchet

    -   7/16" socket

    -   ½" socket

-   Ratchet with ½" drive

-   Drill

    -   Metal bits

    -   Phillips/Robinson's for screws

### Instructions

#### Tripod + Mast Assembly

1.  Assemble the tripod according to instructions provided by the
    manufacturer.

    -   It is easiest to install the TRM-10L with it lying on its side.

2.  Insert mast into the center of the tripod. Bolts on the tripod may
    need to be loosened to allow space for the mast to slide through.

3.  Attach foot to base of mast.

4.  Attach lower guy wires to the lower guy ring using quick links or
    carabiners.

5.  Place tripod + mast assembly upright.

6.  Position the assembly so the mast stands level and the tripod legs
    are on stable ground.

7.  Screw on wooden blocks to the tripod legs to prevent them from
    sinking into the ground. This is suggested for most installations as
    the ground will soften in the spring and fall.

    -   Alternatively, you can bury cement blocks filled with sand for
        each foot to stand on.

8.  If you are mounting a solar panel, rotate the tripod so that the
    'ladder' side with four crossbars is facing south.

9.  Place three anchors 7 feet (2 m) from the base of the mast such that
    once the guy wires are attached they are between the tripod legs.

    -   If using angle iron

10. Attach the loose end of the lower guy wires to each anchor.

11. Tighten the guy wires with:

    -   In-line wire tensioner:

        i.  Remove tensioner lock.

        ii. Place guy wire in the slot of tensioner.

        iii. Insert ½" drive ratchet into square slot of tensioner.

        iv. Use the ratchet to tightly spool guy wire until taught, but
            not too taught.

            -   Tripod legs will lift off the ground if too tight, or
                the mast will bend.

        v.  Insert tensioner lock in opposing holes to keep guy wire in
            place.

        vi. Multiple tensioners may be necessary if there is too much
            excess guy wire.

    -   Turnbuckle:
        [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zz_nS79_JDg&t=386s]{.ul}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zz_nS79_JDg&t=386s)

        i.  Before all guy wires are taught, loosen the turnbuckle until
            only 2 full turns remain.

        ii. Tighten guy wires, either with in-line wire tensioners or
            another method.

        iii. Use turnbuckles to finely adjust wire tension until all
             sides have equal tension.

        iv. Use stainless steel wire to immobilize the turnbuckle using
            the [[double-wrap
            method.]{.ul}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zz_nS79_JDg&t=385s)

12. Confirm tower is being held securely in place by guy wires.

#### Mounting Antennas

1.  With antennas assembled w

-
